feat: Scanner rule for unfulfilled promises (#1491)
getappmap/appmap-js: packages/scanner/doc/rules/unfulfilled-promise.md

---
rule: unfulfilled-promise
name: Unfulfilled promise
title: Asynchronous promise remaining unfulfilled
impactDomain: Stability
---

Finds promises which have been created during the recording but have remained unfulfilled at the
end.

### Rule logic

The rule simply looks for return events with value of `Promise { <pending> }` without a subsequent
update.

### Notes

`Promise { <pending> }` is a special value used by the appmap-node agent to represent promises that
haven't been fulfilled yet. Normally, once the promise is fulfilled, an event update is added to the
AppMap with the resolved value and total elapsed run time.

However, if a promise remains unfulfilled when the recording ends (for example when a HTTP response
is sent or a test case finishes) this pending state is never updated.

Most of the time it means some asynchronous computation has been started and its results not awaited
for and therefore not collected; such computations should be removed or the results awaited.

In some cases this is an intended behaviour; for example, a background book-keeping or cleanup

> process might be start that doesn't directly impact the results of the operation that triggered it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
process might be started but doesn't directly impact the results of the operation that triggered it.
```

Author: Should be "started, that" actually, thanks.

> However, testing assumes clean and known environment at the beginning of each case so in testing

Reviewer: This line reads weird, not sure how to fix it. Can you re-phrase it please?

update.

### Notes

`Promise { <pending> }` is a special value used by the appmap-node agent to represent promises that
haven't been fulfilled yet. Normally, once the promise is fulfilled, an event update is added to the
AppMap with the resolved value and total elapsed run time.

However, if a promise remains unfulfilled when the recording ends (for example when a HTTP response
is sent or a test case finishes) this pending state is never updated.

Most of the time it means some asynchronous computation has been started and its results not awaited
for and therefore not collected; such computations should be removed or the results awaited.

In some cases this is an intended behaviour; for example, a background book-keeping or cleanup
process might be started which doesn't directly impact the results of the operation that triggered
it. Note that during testing such processes should still run to completion before a test case
finishes (or else be suppressed altogether); otherwise there might be unintended interference
between test cases leading to brittle tests. Each test case should start from a known, clean and

> quiescent environment.

Author: @brikelly is this any better?
